---
title: How Philosophy Came to Disdain the Wisdom of Oral Cultures
fgColor: "#000000"
bgColor: "#303030"
---

# How Philosophy Came to Disdain the Wisdom of Oral Cultures

By Justin E H Smith

Edited by Marina Benjamin

Published June 1, 2016

A poet, somewhere in Siberia, or the Balkans, or West Africa, some time in the
past 60,000 years, recites thousands of memorised lines in the course of an
evening. The lines are packed with fixed epithets and clichés. The bard is not
concerned with originality, but with intonation and delivery: he or she is
perfectly attuned to the circumstances of the day, and to the mood and
expectations of his or her listeners.

If this were happening 6,000-plus years ago, the poet’s words would in no way
have been anchored in visible signs, in text. For the vast majority of the time
that human beings have been on Earth, words have had no worldly reality other
than the sound made when they are spoken.

As the theorist Walter J Ong pointed out in Orality and Literacy: Technologizing
the Word (1982), it is difficult, perhaps even impossible, now to imagine how
differently language would have been experienced in a culture of ‘primary
orality’. There would be nowhere to ‘look up a word’, no authoritative source
telling us the shape the word ‘actually’ takes. There would be no way to affirm
the word’s existence at all except by speaking it – and this necessary condition
of survival is important for understanding the relatively repetitive nature of
epic poetry. Say it over and over again, or it will slip away. In the absence of
fixed, textual anchors for words, there would be a sharp sense that language is
charged with power, almost magic: the idea that words, when spoken, can bring
about new states of affairs in the world. They do not so much describe, as
invoke.

As a consequence of the development of writing, first in the ancient Near East
and soon after in Greece, old habits of thought began to die out, and certain
other, previously latent, mental faculties began to express themselves. Words
were now anchored and, though spellings could change from one generation to
another, or one region to another, there were now physical traces that endured,
which could be transmitted, consulted and pointed to in settling questions about
the use or authority of spoken language.

Writing rapidly turned customs into laws, agreements into contracts,
genealogical lore into history. In each case, what had once been fundamentally
temporal and singular was transformed into something eternal (as in, ‘outside of
time’) and general. Even the simple act of making everyday lists of common
objects – an act impossible in a primary oral culture – was already a triumph of
abstraction and systematisation. From here it was just one small step to what we
now call ‘philosophy’.

Homer’s epic poetry, which originates in the same oral epic traditions as those
of the Balkans or of West Africa, was written down, frozen, fixed, and from this
it became ‘literature’. There are no arguments in the Iliad: much of what is
said arises from metrical exigencies, the need to fill in a line with the right
number of syllables, or from epithets whose function is largely mnemonic (and
thus unnecessary when transferred into writing). Yet Homer would become an
authority for early philosophers nonetheless: revealing truths about humanity
not by argument or debate, but by declamation, now frozen into text.

Plato would express extreme concern about the role, if any, that poets should
play in society. But he was not talking about poets as we think of them: he had
in mind reciters, bards who incite emotions with living performances,
invocations and channellings of absent persons and beings.

It is not orality that philosophy rejects, necessarily: Socrates himself
rejected writing, identifying instead with a form of oral culture. Plato would
also ensure the philosophical canonisation of his own mentor by writing down
(how faithfully, we don’t know) what Socrates would have preferred to merely
say, and so would have preferred to have lost to the wind. Arguably, it is in
virtue of Plato’s recording that we might say, today, that Socrates was a
philosopher.

Plato and Aristotle, both, were willing to learn from Homer, once he had been
written down. And Socrates, though Plato still felt he had to write him down,
was already engaged in a sort of activity very different from poetic recitation.
This was dialectic: the structured, working-through of a question towards an end
that has not been predetermined – even if this practice emerged indirectly from
forms of reasoning only actualised with the advent of writing.

The freezing in text of dialectical reasoning, with a heavy admixture (however
impure or problematic) of poetry, aphorism and myth, became the model for what,
in the European tradition, was thought of as ‘philosophy’ for the next few
millennia.

Why are these historical reflections important today? Because what is at stake
is nothing less than our understanding of the scope and nature of philosophical
enquiry.

The Italian philosopher of history Giambattista Vico wrote in his Scienza Nuova
(1725): ‘the order of ideas must follow the order of institutions’. This order
was, namely: ‘First the woods, then cultivated fields and huts, next little
houses and villages, thence cities, finally academies and philosophers.’ It is
implicit for Vico that the philosophers in these academies are not illiterate.
The order of ideas is the order of the emergence of the technology of writing.

Within academic philosophy today, there is significant concern arising from how
to make philosophy more ‘inclusive’, but no interest at all in questioning
Vico’s order, in going back and recuperating what forms of thought might have
been left behind in the woods and fields.

The groups ordinarily targeted by philosophy’s ‘inclusivity drive’ already dwell
in the cities and share in literacy, even if discriminatory measures often block
their full cultivation of it. No arguments are being made for the inclusion of
people belonging to cultures that value other forms of knowledge: there are no
efforts to recruit philosophers from among Inuit hunters or Hmong peasants.

The practical obstacles to such recruitment from a true cross-section of
humanity are obvious. Were it to happen, the simple process of moving from
traditional ways of life into academic institutions would at the same time
dilute and transform the perspectives that are deserving of more attention.
Irrespective of such unhappy outcomes, there is already substantial scholarship
on these forms of thought accumulated in philosophy’s neighbouring disciplines –
notably history, anthropology, and world literatures – to which philosophers
already have access. It’s a literature that could serve as a corrective to the
foundational bias, present since the emergence of philosophy as a distinct
activity.

As it happens, there are few members of primary oral cultures left in the world.
And yet from a historical perspective the great bulk of human experience resides
with them. There are, moreover, members of literate cultures, and subcultures,
whose primary experience of language is oral, based in storytelling, not
argumentation, and that is living and charged, not fixed and frozen. Plato saw
these people as representing a lower, and more dangerous, use of language than
the one worthy of philosophers.

Philosophers still tend to disdain, or at least to conceive as categorically
different from their own speciality, the use of language deployed by bards and
poets, whether from Siberia or the South Bronx. Again, this disdain leaves out
the bulk of human experience. Until it is eradicated, the present talk of the
ideal of inclusion will remain mere lip-service.

## About the Author

[Justin E H Smith](https://aeon.co/users/justin-e-h-smith) is a professor of
history and philosophy of science at the Université Paris Diderot (Paris 7). He
writes frequently for The New York Times and Harper’s Magazine. His latest book
is
[Irrationality: A History of the Dark Side of Reason (2019)](https://press.princeton.edu/titles/13415.html).

Read online at
[Aeon.co](https://aeon.co/ideas/how-philosophy-came-to-disdain-the-wisdom-of-oral-cultures)
