---
title: 100 Generations of Fiji Oral History — The Nabukelevu Eruption
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import Nabukelevu from "@/assets/webzine/img/Nabukelevu.webp";
import Kadavu from "@/assets/webzine/img/Kadavu.webp";

# A dramatic volcano eruption changed lives in Fiji 2,500 years ago. 100 generations have kept the story alive

By [Patrick D Nunn](https://theconversation.com/profiles/patrick-d-nunn-132414),
Professor of Geography, School of Law and Society, University of the Sunshine
Coast

Published August 16, 2023

Can you imagine a scientist who could neither read nor write, who spoke their
wisdom in riddles, in tales of fantastic beings flying through the sky, fighting
each another furiously and noisily, drinking the ocean dry, and throwing giant
spears with force enough to leave massive holes in rocky headlands?

Our newly published research in
[the journal Oral Tradition](https://journal.oraltradition.org/driva-qele-stealing-earth-oral-accounts-of-the-volcanic-eruption-of-nabukelevu-mt-washington-kadavu-island-fiji-2500-years-ago/)
shows memories of a volcanic eruption in Fiji some 2,500 years ago were encoded
in oral traditions in precisely these ways.

They were never intended as fanciful stories, but rather as the pragmatic
foundations of a system of local risk management.

## Life-changing events

Around 2,500 years ago, at the western end of the island of Kadavu in the
southern part of Fiji, the ground shook, the ocean became agitated, and clouds
of billowing smoke and ash poured into the sky.

When the clouds cleared, the people saw a new mountain had formed, its shape
resembling a mound of earth in which yams are grown. This gave the mountain its
name – Nabukelevu, the giant yam mound. (It was renamed Mount Washington during
Fiji’s colonial history.)

<figure>
  <Image
    src={Nabukelevu}
    alt="Nabukelevu from the northeast, its top hidden in cloud"
  />
  <figcaption>
    <p>
      Nabukelevu from the northeast, its top hidden in cloud. Inset: Nabukelevu
      from the west in 1827 after the drawing by the artist aboard the
      Astrolabe, the ship of French explorer Dumont d’Urville. It is an original
      lithograph by H. van der Burch after original artwork by Louis Auguste de
      Sainson
    </p>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

So dramatic, so life-changing were the events
[associated with this eruption](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0377027303004141),
the people who witnessed it told stories about it. These stories have endured
more than two millennia, faithfully passed on across roughly 100 generations to
reach us today.

Scientists used to dismiss such stories as fictions, devalue them with labels
like “myth” or “legend”. But the situation is changing.

Today, we are starting to recognise that many such “stories” are authentic
memories of human pasts, encoded in oral traditions in ways that represent the
worldviews of people from
[long ago](https://www.bloomsbury.com/au/edge-of-memory-9781472943286/).

In other words, these stories served the same purpose as scientific accounts,
and the people who told them were trying to understand the natural world, much
like scientists do today.

## Battle of the _vu_

The most common story about the 2,500-year-old eruption of Nabukelevu is one
involving a “god” (vu in Fijian) named Tanovo from the island of Ono, about 56km
from the volcano.

Tanovo’s view of the sunset became blocked one day by this huge mountain. Our
research identifies this as a volcanic dome that was created during the
eruption, raising the height of the mountain several hundred feet.

Enraged, Tanovo flew to Nabukelevu and started to tear down the mountain, a
process described by local residents as driva qele (stealing earth). This
explains why even today the summit of Nabukelevu has a crater.

But Tanovo was interrupted by the “god” of Nabukelevu, named Tautaumolau. The
pair started fighting. A chase ensued through the sky and, as the two twisted
and turned, the earth being carried by Tanovo started falling to the ground,
where it is said to have “created” islands.

We conclude that the sequence in which these islands are said to have been
created is likely to represent the movement of the ash plume from the eruption,
as shown on the map below.

<figure>
  <Image
    src={Kadavu}
    alt="A map of the Islands of Kadavu, southern Fiji with an inset map of the possible route of the Nabukelevu ash cloud 2,500 years ago"
  />
  <figcaption>
    <p>
      Smaller offshore islands named in seven versions of the Nabukelevu story
      as having formed following the Nabukelevu eruption. Inset shows the
      possible trace of the ash cloud based on the stories.
    </p>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## 'Myths' based in fact

Geologists would today find it exceedingly difficult to deduce such details of
an ancient eruption. But here, in the oral traditions of Kadavu people, this
information is readily available.

Another detail we would never know if we did not have the oral traditions is
about the tsunami the eruption caused.

In some versions of the story, one of the “gods” is so frightened, he hides
beneath the sea. But his rival comes along and drinks up all the water at that
place, a detail our research interprets as a memory of the ocean withdrawing
prior to tsunami impact.

Other details in the oral traditions recall how one god threw a massive spear at
his rival but missed, leaving behind a huge hole in a rock. This is a good
example of how landforms likely predating the eruption can be retrofitted to a
narrative.

Our study adds to the growing body of scientific research into “myths” and
“legends”, showing that many have a basis in fact, and the details they contain
add depth and breadth to our understanding of human pasts.

The [Kadavu volcano stories](https://kaidravuni.com/) discussed here also show
ancient societies were no less risk aware and risk averse than ours are today.
The imperative was to survive, greatly aided by keeping alive memories of all
the hazards that existed in a particular place.

Australian First Peoples’ cultures are
[replete with similar stories](https://theconversation.com/when-the-bullin-shrieked-aboriginal-memories-of-volcanic-eruptions-thousands-of-years-ago-81986).

Literate people, those who read and write, tend to be impressed by the
extraordinary time depth of oral traditions, like those about the 2,500-year old
eruption of Nabukelevu. But not everyone is.

In early 2019, I was sitting and chatting to Ratu Petero Uluinaceva in Waisomo
Village, after he had finished relating the Ono people’s story of the eruption.
I told him this particular story recalled events which occurred more than two
millennia ago – and thought he might be impressed. But he wasn’t.

“We know our stories are that old, that they recall our ancient history,” he
told me with a grin. “But we are glad you have now learned this too!”

## Acknowledgements

_Acknowledgements: The original research was conducted in collaboration with
Loredana Lancini and Rita Compatangelo-Soussignan (University of Le Mans), Meli
Nanuku and Kaliopate Tavola (Fiji Museum), Taniela Bolea (University of the
Sunshine Coast) and Paul Geraghty (University of the South Pacific)._

## About the Author

After 30 years of research, mostly focused in the Asia-Pacific region, Professor
Nunn has accumulated a degree of expertise in a number of different fields. His
primary field is geography, once largely physical in focus, but now straddling
various aspects of sustainability. Professor Nunn has worked for a number of
years in climate change, mostly on sea level and on the challenges of effective
adaptation in poorer countries. He has also worked on archaeological topics,
usually through the lens of palaeoenvironment reconstruction, but also applying
his geological training to ceramic mineralogy and radiocarbon chronology. Since
2000, when a coup in Fiji interrupted a planned research programme, Professor
Nunn became interested in myths as potential sources of information about
geological hazards, particularly earthquakes and tsunamis, volcanic eruptions
and abrupt coastal change. More at www.patricknunn.org

Read online at
[The Conversation](https://theconversation.com/a-dramatic-volcano-eruption-changed-lives-in-fiji-2-500-years-ago-100-generations-have-kept-the-story-alive-211619)
