---
title: DNA Confirms Oral History of Swahili People
---

import { Image } from "astro:assets";
import SwahiliDNA1 from "@/assets/webzine/img/SwahiliDNA1.webp";
import SwahiliDNA2 from "@/assets/webzine/img/SwahiliDNA2.webp";

<hgroup>
  <h1>DNA Confirms Oral History of Swahili People</h1>
  <p>
    A genetic analysis of dozens of ancient skeletons from East Africa helps pin
    down the origins of coastal Swahili society.
  </p>
</hgroup>

By Elie Dolgin

Published March 29, 2023

<figure>
  <Image
    src={SwahiliDNA1}
    alt="A view of several low stone ruins in a clearing with an archway still standing to the right. "
  />
  <figcaption>
    <p>
      The ruins of Gede, a medieval Swahili coastal settlement in Kenya where
      researchers are now searching for the remains of less well-to-do Swahili
      people.
    </p>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

A long history of mercantile trade along the eastern shores of Africa left its
mark on the DNA of ancient Swahili people.

A new analysis of centuries-old bones and teeth collected from six burial sites
across coastal Kenya and Tanzania has found that, around 1,000 years ago, local
African women began having children with Persian traders — and that the
descendants of these unions gained power and status in the highest levels of
[pre-colonial Swahili society](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/14/arts/design/swahili-the-pulse-of-life-at-the-crossroads.html).

The findings help elucidate the foundations of Swahili civilization, and suggest
that long-told origin stories, passed down through generations of Swahili
families, may be more truthful than many outsiders have presumed.

“The genetics corroborate the Swahili people’s own history that they tell about
themselves, not what others were saying about them,” said Esther Brielle, a
geneticist and postdoctoral fellow at Harvard who led the DNA analysis with her
adviser, David Reich.

The researchers published their findings on Wednesday in the journal Nature.

The Swahili Coast is a narrow strip of land that stretches some 2,000 miles
along the Eastern African seaboard — from modern-day Mozambique, Comoros and
Madagascar in the south, to Somalia in the north. In its medieval heyday, the
region was home to hundreds of port towns, each ruled independently, but with a
common religion (Islam), language (Kiswahili) and culture.

Many towns grew immensely wealthy thanks to a vibrant trading network with
merchants who sailed across the Indian Ocean on the monsoon winds. Middle
Eastern pottery, Asian cloths‌‌ and other luxury goods came in. African gold,
ivory and timber‌‌ went out — along with a steady flow of enslaved people, who
were shipped off and sold across the Arabian Peninsula and Persian Gulf. (Slave
trading later took place between the Swahili coast and Europe as well.)

A unique cosmopolitan society emerged that blended African customs and beliefs
with those of the foreign traders, some of whom stuck around and assimilated.

Islam, for example, arrived from the Middle East and became an integral part of
the Swahili social fabric, but with coral-stone mosques built and decorated in a
local, East African style. Or consider the Kiswahili language, which is Bantu in
origin but borrows heavily from Indian and Middle Eastern tongues.

The arrival of Europeans, beginning around 1500, followed by Omani sailors some
200 years later, changed the character of the region. Yet, aspects of the
heritage and traditions that took root in the Middle Ages remain evident in East
Africa today.

Researchers who have studied the region have long debated where those influences
came from.

At first, most scholars thought that the civilization, with its lavish mosques
and ornate housewares, must have been the achievement of a foreign ruling class
that established outposts in East Africa. But over the past 40 years,
archaeologists, linguists and historians have come to see Swahili society as
predominantly homegrown — with outside elements adopted over time that had only
a marginal impact.

That African-centric version of Swahili roots never sat well with the Swahili
people themselves, though.

They generally preferred their own origin story, one in which princes from
present-day Iran (then known as Persia) sailed across the Indian Ocean, married
local women and enmeshed themselves into East African society. Depending on the
narrative source, that story dates to around 850 or 1000 — the same period
during which genetic mixing was underway, according to the DNA analysis.

“It’s remarkably spot on,” said Mark Horton, an archaeologist at the Royal
Agricultural University of England who has worked on the Swahili coast for
decades.

“This oral tradition was always maligned,” added George Abungu, an archaeologist
and former director-general of the National Museums of Kenya (who, like Dr.
Horton, was not involved in the genetic analysis). “Now, with this DNA study, we
see there was some truth to it.”

<figure>
  <Image
    src={SwahiliDNA2}
    alt="A close-up view of a simple drawing of a sailing ship etched in mottled brown rock."
  />
  <figcaption>
    <p>
      A drawing of a ship carved into the walls of the Takwa ruins on Manda
      Island, Kenya, where several skeletons included in the study were found.
    </p>
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The ancient DNA study is the largest of its kind from Africa, involving 135
skeletons dating to late-medieval and early-modern times, 80 of which have
yielded analyzable DNA.

To figure out where these people came from, the researchers compared genetic
signatures from the dug-up bones with cheek swabs or saliva samples taken from
modern-day individuals living in Africa, the Middle East and around the world.

The burial-site DNA traced back to two primary sources: Africans and present-day
Iranians. Smaller contributions came from South Asians and Arabs as well, with
foreign DNA representing about half of the skeletons’ genealogy.

“It’s surprising that the genetic signature is so strong,” said Jeffrey
Fleisher, an archaeologist at Rice University who helped excavate the Tanzanian
sites included in the analysis. He had predicted that the genetic influence from
outside of Africa would be much smaller, he said.

Different patterns of inheritance for different stretches of DNA have revealed
how the genetic mixing came about.

Gene sequences from tiny power factories inside the cell, known as mitochondria,
were overwhelmingly African in origin. Since children inherit these bits of DNA
only from their mothers, the researchers inferred that the maternal forbearers
of the Swahili people were mostly of African descent.

By comparison, the Y chromosome, passed from father to son, was chock-full of
Asian DNA that the researchers found was common in modern-day Iran. So, a large
fraction of Swahili ancestry presumably came from Persian men.

The picture that emerges is one of Persian men mixing with African women at
multiple locations along the Swahili Coast around the turn of the first
millennium, with each group contributing about half of the genes that are found
in Swahili people today. (African men and Indian women added small amounts to
the gene pool as well.)

“The genetic evidence enriches our understanding of the history,” said Abdul
Sheriff, a historian and former museum curator in Zanzibar, Tanzania. “All of
this really jells together to explain more fully how this civilization came
about.”

Dr. Reich initially assumed that conquering men settled the region by force,
displacing the local males in the process. “My hypothesis was that this was a
genetic signature of inequality and exploitation,” he said.

This is what he had seen in other parts of the world. In the Americas, for
example, where a history of colonization, enslavement and subjugation explains
why almost all the foreign ancestry in African American and Latin American
individuals comes from European males.

But that turned out to be a “naïve expectation,” Dr. Reich said, because “it
didn’t take into account the cultural context in this particular case.”

In East Africa, Persian customs never came to dominate. Instead, most foreign
influences — language, architecture, fashion, arts — were incorporated into a
way of life that remained predominantly African in character, with social
strictures, kinship systems and agricultural practices that reflected Indigenous
traditions.

“Swahili was an absorbing society,” said Adria LaViolette, an archaeologist at
the University of Virginia who has worked on the East African coast for over 35
years. Even as the Persians who arrived influenced the culture, “they became
Swahili,” she said.

One major caveat to the study: Nearly all the bones and teeth came from
ornamental tombs that were located near grand mosques, sites where only the
upper class would have been laid to rest. As such, Chapurukha Kusimba, one of
the study’s authors, said that the results might not be representative of the
general populace.

A Kenyan-born anthropological archaeologist from the University of South
Florida, Dr. Kusimba is now looking for skeletons from less well-to-do burial
sites along the Swahili coast. But until he has those gene sequences in hand, it
will be impossible to say just how far-reaching the foreign influence has been
on the DNA of people of Swahili descent.

A key step in all this research, said Dr. Kusimba and his colleagues, was their
engagement with local Swahili communities.

Protocols for disinterring, sampling and reburying human remains were
established in consultation with local religious leaders and community
stakeholders. Under Islamic law, exhumations are permitted if they serve a
public interest, including that of determining ancestry, according to Ebrahim
Moosa, who studies Islamic law and ethics at the University of Notre Dame.

Following the DNA analysis, project leaders convened meetings — at a museum hall
in Kenya and alongside the ruins themselves in Tanzania — to present their
findings ahead of publication and to discuss any community concerns around
ethnic-identity politics that the results might raise.

“There was a lot of enthusiasm and support” for the study, Dr. Kusimba said, and
the feedback given by the community leaders proved helpful in shaping the final
manuscript.

“I was waiting for this,” said Athman Lali Omar, the former head of coastal
archaeology at the National Museums of Kenya. Mr. Omar belongs to the Bajuni
people, one of the many groups that make up the coastal Swahili people. “It
confirms the way I’ve always seen myself.”

Read online at
[nytimes.com](https://www.nytimes.com/2023/03/29/science/ancient-swahili-dna.html)
